# Computational-Genomics
This repository contains second homework and project for Computer Genomics class, master academic studies at School of Electrical Engineering.

## Illumina Pair-End Sequencing Simulator
The goal of this project is to simulate Illumina Pair-End Sequencer in Python programming language. The output of this simulator are two FASTQ files with pair-end reads and one SAM file with aligned reads. The generated SAM file contains original read position and it is used while testing BWA-MEM and Bowtie2 tool accuracy. <br/>
[Project video presentation](https://bit.ly/2RSHyOs)
<br/>
## How to use tool
For generating FASTQ and SAM file run `python main.py 1 --refgenome=PATH_TO_REFERENCE_GENOME_FASTA_FILE --avgquality=[33,73] --coverage --readlength --insertsize --probsnv --probins --probdel`, where read length is less than insert size and probsnv, probins, probdel are optional. <br/>
For evaluating BWA-MEM tool accuracy run `python main.py 2 --bwapath=PATH_TO_BWA_MEM_GENERATED_SAM --sampath=PATH_TO_SIMULATOR_GENERATED_SAM`. <br/>
For evaluating Bowtie2 tool accuracy run `python main.py 3 --bowtiepath=PATH_TO_BOWTIE_GENERATED_SAM --sampath=PATH_TO_SIMULATOR_GENERATED_SAM`. <br/>
## DNA Sequencing
A DNA sequencer is a scientific instrument used to automate the DNA sequencing process. Given a sample of DNA, a DNA sequencer is used to determine the order of the four bases: G (guanine), C (cytosine), A (adenine) and T (thymine). This is then reported as a text string, called a read. <br/>
This tool gets the reference genome in FASTA file and then generates reads by uniformly and randomly choosing fragment position. The second read is reversed complemented as this is part of Illumina sequencing technology. <br/>
Quality of each nucleotide is generated by normally distributing average nucleotide quality, which is simulator input parameter. <br/>
The reads are synchronously outputted into two FASTQ files. Read id is unique for each pair, and the only difference is suffix, which is /1 for read one, and /2 for read two. <br/>
The generated SAM file contains original reads positions and the second read is again reverse complemented, which restores forward DNA strand nucleotide sequence. <br/>
## Evaluating BWA-MEM and Bowtie2 accuracy
This simulator can be used to examine the mapping performance of the BWA-MEM and Bowtie2 tools. The percentage of accuracy is displayed when the tool runs in 2nd or 3rd mode. This percentage represents ratio of correctly aligned and misaligned reads. The read is considered as correctly aligned only if the positions are agreed exactly. 


